TACJTUS: ANNALS.

quarters, though here two were in the game town, and possibly in dis·

tinct portioris of a common enclosure.

l. 33. religione. Eagles are called ‘legionum numina’ (2. 17, 2)3
and the ‘principia’ (see on c. 61, 3). where the standards were kept,
had also the image of the ‘princeps’ (see 4. 2, 4) and the altar ior
sacrifice (the ‘altaria deum ’ here spoizen of).

P. 65, 1. 2. rarum, etc„ parenthetical: see Introd. p. 20, ξ 51.

1. 4. noscebantur, ‘ were capable of recognition ι’ cp. 4. 62, 5.

l. 5. imperat recepitque. Such interchange of the historical present
with a perfect is seen in 2. 7, 1 ; 20, 2, etc.

l. 6. fatalem. This epithet‚ explained by ‘deum ira,’ sostens the
censure conveyed in ‘increpans ' by treating them as hardly responsible
beings. The sense os ‘dicens ’ is supplied from ‘increpans’ with ‘re-
surgere.'

l. 8. ius legationis, ‘the privilege of ambassadorsz’ cp. ‘sacra
legationis,' c. 42, 4. Here the construction is pregnant (see Introd„
p. 20, ξ 53), such a word as ‘ violatum' being implied with ‘iuss

l. 11. c. 40. Eo in metu, etc, ‘in this panic all blamed Germanicus ε’
¹ metus ' may mean ‘ circumstances causing sear,’ as in 2. 72, 2, etc.

l. 15. filium: see c. 41, 3. The elder sons were in Rome, and the
daughters yet unborn. Tiberius would be the adoptive ‘ avus' of the
child.

1. 18. diu cunetatuS, etc. It is meant that he hesitated long to
advise her, and that she was long in consenting: the clause ‘cum . . .
testaretur ’ explains ‘ aspernantem.'

l. 19. degenerem. This word appears to originate with Vergil: ‘ad
pericula ' = ‘ ad pericula subeunda!

l. 21. incedebat, ‘was starting on foot‚’ without such vehicles as
women of rank generally used. ‘ Muliebre' and ⁴ miserabile ’ are also
emphatic.

l. 24. qui manebant, the husbands and friends parting from thern.

1. 26. e. 41. facies, sc. ‘facies rerum (cp. c. 49, 1) non florenti
Caesari, sed urbi captae conveniens erat.'

1. 27. advertere, ‘attractedz' so in 2. 17, 2; 4. 21, 5, etc.

progrediuntur contuberniis : cp. ‘ prog1edior portu,' Verg. Aen.
3. 3003 and for other such uses, see Introd. p. 11, ξ 13.

quis ille, etc. The exclamations are vividly put in their abrupt-
ness, without grammatical construction (as perhaps in c, 35, 2). After
'triste' it is possible that some such word as ‘spectaculum’ or⁴iter’
has dropped out.

1. 30. ad Treveros [et] externae fidei. With ‘ et‚’ ‘ externae fidei '
could only be taken as a dat. depending on the idea of some such verb
as ‘committi‚’ supplied from ‘pergerez' without ‘ets the words would

110

